# Data & Analytics Principles

!!! success "Approved"

    These principles have been approved by the DHCW TDA

## Data is captured once and reused

Data is captured once and reused refers to the practice of collecting patient
information (such as medical history, test results, and treatment plans) during
an initial encounter and then using that data throughout the patientâ€™s care
journey. This approach aims to improve efficiency, reduce duplication, and
enhance continuity of care.

## Data is semantically interoperable

Data is not only syntactically consistent (i.e. formatted correctly) but also
semantically consistent. Different systems can understand and interpret the data
in the same way because the data carries the same meaning across systems. For
example, a diagnosis code or a medication name will be interpreted correctly
regardless of the system accessing it.

## Data for analytical use is not an after thought

Secondary uses of data is integral to the design of any new applications.
Publishing data to analytical stores must be included prior to deployment.

## Data is secured

Data is compliant with security, regulatory and privacy requirements.
Appropriate measures have been implemented to protect it from unauthorised
access, disclosure, alteration, or destruction. Data security involves
safeguarding sensitive information and ensuring its confidentiality, integrity,
and availability.

This can be achieved through various technical, organisational, and procedural
controls, such as encryption, access controls, authentication mechanisms, data
backups, and security monitoring. Effective data security practices aim to
mitigate risks associated with data breaches, cyber attacks, insider threats,
and other security vulnerabilities, thereby safeguarding the privacy, trust,
and reputation of individuals and organisations.

## Data is findable, accessible and well described

Data should be easy to find for both humans and computers. These data should be
well described through comprehensive metadata and should include metrics
relating to data quality and coverage. Data should be easily discoverable,
available for authorised users, and accompanied by detailed documentation that
enhances its understanding and usability.

## Data is high quality

Data quality is monitored and reported. High-quality data serves as a reliable
foundation for analysis, decision-making, and insights generation. It instils
confidence in the results derived from data-driven processes and provides the
opportunity to derive maximum value from data assets.
